1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Apr 14;12:651282. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.651282. 
eCollection 2021.

Root Exudates Alter the Expression of Diverse Metabolic, Transport, Regulatory, 
and Stress Response Genes in Rhizosphere Pseudomonas.

Mavrodi OV(1), McWilliams JR(1), Peter JO(1), Berim A(2), Hassan KA(3), Elbourne 
LDH(4), LeTourneau MK(5), Gang DR(2), Paulsen IT(4), Weller DM(5), Thomashow 
LS(5), Flynt AS(1), Mavrodi DV(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological, Environmental, and Earth Sciences, The University of 
Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, MS, United States.
(2)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, 
United States.
(3)School of Environmental and Life Sciences, The University of Newcastle, 
Callaghan, NSW, Australia.
(4)Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.
(5)USDA Agricultural Research Service, Wheat Health, Genetics and Quality 
Research Unit, Pullman, WA, United States.

Plants live in association with microorganisms that positively influence plant 
development, vigor, and fitness in response to pathogens and abiotic stressors. 
The bulk of the plant microbiome is concentrated belowground at the plant 
root-soil interface. Plant roots secrete carbon-rich rhizodeposits containing 
primary and secondary low molecular weight metabolites, lysates, and mucilages. 
These exudates provide nutrients for soil microorganisms and modulate their 
affinity to host plants, but molecular details of this process are largely 
unresolved. We addressed this gap by focusing on the molecular dialog between 
eight well-characterized beneficial strains of the Pseudomonas fluorescens group 
and Brachypodium distachyon, a model for economically important food, feed, 
forage, and biomass crops of the grass family. We collected and analyzed root 
exudates of B. distachyon and demonstrated the presence of multiple 
carbohydrates, amino acids, organic acids, and phenolic compounds. The 
subsequent screening of bacteria by Biolog Phenotype MicroArrays revealed that 
many of these metabolites provide carbon and energy for the Pseudomonas strains. 
RNA-seq profiling of bacterial cultures amended with root exudates revealed 
changes in the expression of genes encoding numerous catabolic and anabolic 
enzymes, transporters, transcriptional regulators, stress response, and 
conserved hypothetical proteins. Almost half of the differentially expressed 
genes mapped to the variable part of the strains' pangenome, reflecting the 
importance of the variable gene content in the adaptation of P. fluorescens to 
the rhizosphere lifestyle. Our results collectively reveal the diversity of 
cellular pathways and physiological responses underlying the establishment of 
mutualistic interactions between these beneficial rhizobacteria and their plant 
hosts.

Copyright Â© 2021 Mavrodi, McWilliams, Peter, Berim, Hassan, Elbourne, 
LeTourneau, Gang, Paulsen, Weller, Thomashow, Flynt and Mavrodi.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.651282
PMCID: PMC8079746
PMID: 33936009

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.