1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2024 Oct;74(10):006558. doi:
10.1099/ijsem.0.006558.

Fidelibacter multiformis gen. nov., sp. nov., isolated from a deep subsurface 
aquifer and proposal of Fidelibacterota phyl. nov., formerly called Marine Group 
A, SAR406 or Candidatus Marinimicrobia.

Katayama T(1), Nobu MK(2), Kamagata Y(3), Tamaki H(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute for Geo-Resources and Environment, Geological Survey of 
Japan (GSJ), National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology 
(AIST), Tsukuba, 305-8567, Japan.
(2)Institute for Extra-cutting-edge Science and Technology Avant-garde Research 
(X-star), Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC), 
Yokosuka, 237-0061, Japan.
(3)Bioproduction Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial 
Science and Technology, Tsukuba, 305-8566, Japan.

A Gram-negative, obligatory anaerobic, chemoheterotrophic bacterium, designated 
strain IA91T, was isolated from sediments and formation water from deep aquifers 
in Japan. IA91T derives its peptidoglycan, energy and carbon from exogenous cell 
wall fragments, namely muropeptides, released from actively reproducing 
bacteria, and is dependent on other bacteria for cell wall formation, growth and 
even cell shape: IA91T is irregular rod-shaped but coccoids when muropeptide is 
absent. IA91T grew in a temperature range of 25-45 °C with optimum growth at 
40 °C. IA91T utilized limited substrates, yeast extract, muropeptides and 
d-lactate. The major end products from yeast extract degradation were acetate, 
hydrogen and carbon dioxide. Co-cultivation with a hydrogen-scavenging 
methanogenic archaeon promoted IA91T growth. No anaerobic respiration with 
nitrate, nitrite, sulphate or Fe(III) was observed. The major cellular fatty 
acids are C16 : 0, C18 : 1 trans9, C18 : 0 and C17 : 0. The G+C content of the 
genomic DNA was 45.6 mol%. Phylogenetic analysis based on 16S rRNA gene and 
conserved protein sequences involved in replication, transcription and 
translation indicated that IA91T belonged to the candidate phylum Marine Group A 
(MG-A, SAR406 or Ca. Marinimicrobia) with no cultivated representatives. Based 
on the phenotypic and phylogenomic characteristics, a new genus and species, 
Fidelibacter multiformis gen. nov., sp. nov., is proposed for IA91T (= JCM 
39387T = KCTC 25736T). In addition, a new bacterial phylum named Fidelibacterota 
phyl. nov. is proposed for the candidate phylum MG-A represented by F. 
multiformis and Fidelibacteraceae fam. nov., Fidelibacterales ord. nov. and 
Fidelibacteria classis nov.

DOI: 10.1099/ijsem.0.006558
PMCID: PMC11652737
PMID: 39465541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.