+1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2007 Aug;57(Pt 8):1815-1818. doi:
10.1099/ijs.0.65032-0.

Ruegeria pelagia sp. nov., isolated from the Sargasso Sea, Atlantic Ocean.

Lee K(1), Choo YJ(1), Giovannoni SJ(2), Cho JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology and Ocean Sciences, Inha University, Incheon 402-751, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, 
USA.

Gram-negative, facultatively aerobic, chemoheterotrophic, short rod-shaped 
marine bacterial strains HTCC2662(T) and HTCC2663, isolated from the Sargasso 
Sea by using a dilution-to-extinction culturing method, were investigated to 
determine their taxonomic position. Characterization of the two strains by 
phenotypic and phylogenetic analyses revealed that they belonged to the same 
species. The DNA G+C content of strain HTCC2662(T) was 58.4 mol% and the 
predominant cellular fatty acids were C(18 : 1) omega 7c (52.5 %), C(16 : 0) 
2-OH (13.5 %) and C(18 : 1) 11-methyl omega 7c (12.2 %). Phylogenetic analysis 
of the 16S rRNA gene sequences showed that the strains represented a distinct 
line of descent within the genus Ruegeria, with highest sequence similarities to 
Ruegeria atlantica DSM 5823(T) (97.2 %), Ruegeria lacuscaerulensis DSM 11314(T) 
(96.5 %) and Ruegeria pomeroyi DSM 15171(T) (95.6 %). Several phenotypic 
characteristics, including facultatively requiring NaCl and oxygen for growth, 
together with the cellular fatty acid composition, differentiated strain 
HTCC2662(T) from other members of the genus Ruegeria. Based on phenotypic, 
chemotaxonomic and phylogenetic traits, it is suggested that strains HTCC2662(T) 
and HTCC2663 represent a novel species of the genus Ruegeria, for which the name 
Ruegeria pelagia sp. nov. is proposed. The type strain is HTCC2662(T) (=KCCM 
42378(T)=NBRC 102038(T)).

DOI: 10.1099/ijs.0.65032-0
PMID: 17684263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]