docs/keywords_without_structured_paths.md, before:

# BacDive Keywords WITHOUT Structured Path Equivalents

**Date:** 2025-10-22
**Source:** Analysis of bacdive.strains_api MongoDB collection

Based on my analysis, here are ALL keywords where "Specific Path Available?" is "No" or "N/A":

## Definitive List of Keywords Without Structured Paths

### 1. Metadata / Non-Phenotypic (Can Ignore)

| Keyword | Count | Notes |
|---------|-------|-------|
| Bacteria | 97,270 | Taxonomy - not phenotype |
| Archaea | 1,125 | Taxonomy - not phenotype |
| 16S sequence | 27,058 | Data availability - not phenotype |
| genome sequence | 17,617 | Data availability - not phenotype |
| other | 49 | Uninformative catch-all |

**Conclusion:** These 5 keywords should NOT be mapped - they're metadata, not phenotypes.

---

### 2. Keywords WITH Structured Paths (But Different Format)

| Keyword | Count | Structured Path | Status |
|---------|-------|----------------|--------|
| Gram-negative | 12,842 | `Morphology.cell morphology.gram stain` = "negative" | **FIXABLE** - need synonym mapping |
| Gram-positive | 6,690 | `Morphology.cell morphology.gram stain` = "positive" | **FIXABLE** - need synonym mapping |
| Gram-variable | 101 | `Morphology.cell morphology.gram stain` = "variable" | **FIXABLE** - need synonym mapping |
| motile | 5,457 | `Morphology.cell morphology.motility` = "yes" | **FIXABLE** - need synonym mapping |
| spore-forming | 3,359 | `Physiology and metabolism.spore formation` = "yes" | **FIXABLE** - need synonym mapping |

**Conclusion:** These 5 keywords HAVE structured paths but need synonym mappings to connect them.

**Total strains affected:** 4,425 (Gram) + 113 (motile) + 1,440 (spore) = **5,978 strains**

---

### 3. Keywords WITHOUT Structured Path (True N/A)

#### 3a. Production/Metabolism Keywords (7 keywords, 1,027 strains)

| Keyword | Count | Investigation Result |
|---------|-------|---------------------|
| antibiotic compound production | 508 | **PARTIAL PATH:** `Physiology.compound production.compound` has some antibiotics (Heptaenic antibiotic: 99, Antimycin: 70, streptomycin: 19, oxytetracycline: 17) but keyword is more general |
| alcohol production | 30 | **PARTIAL PATH:** `Physiology.compound production.compound` = "ethanol" (19 strains) but keyword may cover more |
| toxin production | 53 | **PARTIAL PATH:** `Physiology.compound production.compound` = "toxin" (33 strains) but keyword may cover more |
| amino acid production | 28 | **PARTIAL PATH:** `Physiology.compound production.compound` = "L glutamic acid" (21 strains) but keyword may cover more |
| lactate production | 34 | **NO PATH FOUND** |
| polysaccharide production | 26 | **NO PATH FOUND** |
| methane production | 5 | **NO PATH FOUND** |

**Conclusion:** These keywords are **partially covered** by `Physiology and metabolism.compound production.compound` but the keyword is more general. The structured path has specific compounds, but keywords are broader categories.

**Recommendation:**
- Keep keyword mappings (already in custom_curies.yaml ✓)
- **Consider also extracting** from `Physiology and metabolism.compound production.compound` to get specific compounds
- Keywords give you "produces antibiotics" - structured path gives you "produces streptomycin"
- Both have value!

---

#### 3b. Pathogen Keywords (3 keywords, 2,683 strains)

| Keyword | Count | Investigation Result |
|---------|-------|---------------------|
| human pathogen | 1,607 | **CORRELATION:** Most (1,338) have biosafety level 2, but biosafety level ≠ pathogen type |
| animal pathogen | 700 | **CORRELATION:** Mixed biosafety levels (234 level 1, 225 level 2, 68 level 2,1) |
| plant pathogen | 376 | **CORRELATION:** Mostly level 1 (276 strains) |

**Investigation Details:**
- All strains have `Safety information.risk assessment.biosafety level`
- Biosafety level indicates **risk to humans**, not **host specificity**
- A level 1 plant pathogen is safe for humans but pathogenic to plants
- **NO** structured field for "host organism pathogenicity"
- `Isolation.origin.host organism` exists but indicates **isolation source**, not pathogenicity

**Conclusion:** These keywords provide **host-specific pathogenicity** information that is NOT available in structured paths.

**Recommendation:** Keep keyword mappings (already in custom_curies.yaml ✓)

---

#### 3c. Pigmentation Keywords (1 keyword, 166 strains)

| Keyword | Count | Investigation Result |
|---------|-------|---------------------|
| pigmented | 166 | **PATH EXISTS BUT DIFFERENT:** `Morphology.pigmentation.color` has specific colors (yellow: 37, red: 18, brown: 16, etc.) but only 4,534 strains have this data |

**Analysis:**
- Keyword "pigmented" (166 strains) is a **generic flag**
- Structured path `Morphology.pigmentation.color` (4,534 strains) has **specific colors**
- **No overlap** - these are independent data sources
- Keyword: "yes, it's pigmented"
- Structured path: "it's yellow" (or red, brown, etc.)

**Recommendation:**
- Keep keyword mapping for "pigmented" (already in custom_curies.yaml ✓)
- **ADD extraction** from `Morphology.pigmentation.color` to get specific pigment colors
- kg-microbe already has pigment color mappings in custom_curies.yaml (lines 113-153)
- **ACTION NEEDED:** Check if bacdive.py extracts from `Morphology.pigmentation.color`

---

#### 3d. Antibiotic Resistance Keyword (1 keyword, 157 strains)

| Keyword | Count | Investigation Result |
|---------|-------|---------------------|
| antibiotic resistance | 157 | **PATH EXISTS:** `Physiology and metabolism.antibiotic resistance` (6,560 strains with structured data) AND `Physiology and metabolism.antibiogram` |

**Analysis:**
- Structured path has **much more data** (6,560 strains vs 157 keyword)
- kg-microbe code DOES extract from structured paths (lines 1724-1767)
- Keyword is probably **redundant** or used when specific data unavailable

**Recommendation:** Keep keyword mapping (already in custom_curies.yaml ✓) as fallback

---

#### 3e. Colony Morphology Keyword (1 keyword, 2,582 strains)

| Keyword | Count | Investigation Result |
|---------|-------|---------------------|
| colony-forming | 2,582 | **NO PATH** (colony morphology section exists but doesn't have this specific trait) |

**Analysis:**
- Very generic - almost all bacteria form colonies
- Low information content
- Section `Morphology.colony morphology` exists but doesn't have a "forms colonies" field

**Recommendation:** **Don't map** - too generic to be useful

---

#### 3f. Nitrogen Fixation (1 keyword, 2 strains)

| Keyword | Count | Investigation Result |
|---------|-------|---------------------|
| diazotroph | 2 | **NO PATH FOUND** for nitrogen fixation capability |

**Recommendation:** Add to custom_curies.yaml if desired (very low count)

---

## Summary Table: True N/A Keywords (No Structured Path Alternative)

| Category | Keywords | Total Strains | Keep Mapping? | Extract from Path? |
|----------|----------|---------------|---------------|-------------------|
| **Metadata** | Bacteria, Archaea, 16S sequence, genome sequence, other | 127,089 | **NO** | N/A |
| **Format mismatch** | Gram-*, motile, spore-forming | 28,446* | **YES** | Already done |
| **Production** | antibiotic/alcohol/toxin/amino acid/lactate/polysaccharide/methane production | 1,027 | **YES** | **ADD** compound production |
| **Pathogen** | human/animal/plant pathogen | 2,683 | **YES** | No alternative |
| **Pigmentation** | pigmented | 166 | **YES** | **ADD** pigmentation.color |
| **Resistance** | antibiotic resistance | 157 | **YES** | Already done |
| **Colony** | colony-forming | 2,582 | **NO** | N/A |
| **Diazotroph** | diazotroph | 2 | **OPTIONAL** | N/A |

*Note: Keyword occurrences, not unique strains (strains may have multiple keywords)

---

## Answers to Your Question

**"Are you confident that you have mapped all keyword values to the more specific paths that reveal the same information?"**

### YES for:
- ✅ Oxygen preference
- ✅ Spore formation (with synonym fix needed)
- ✅ Trophic type / nutrition
- ✅ Cell shape
- ✅ Gram stain (with synonym fix needed)
- ✅ Motility (with synonym fix needed)
- ✅ Halophily
- ✅ Antibiotic resistance/sensitivity (structured data preferred)

### NO - Keywords are the ONLY or BETTER source for:
- ❌ **Temperature preference** (mesophilic, thermophilic, psychrophilic, hyperthermophilic) - **NO structured path exists**
- ❌ **Pathogen type** (human/animal/plant) - biosafety level is different information
- ❌ **Production categories** (antibiotic/toxin/metabolite production) - keyword is broader than specific compounds
- ❌ **Generic pigmentation** - structured path has specific colors but keyword is a general flag

### PARTIAL - Both sources have value:
- ⚠️ **Production compounds**: keywords = category, path = specific compounds
- ⚠️ **Pigmentation**: keyword = "pigmented" (generic), path = specific color

---

## Action Items

### High Priority (Fix Synonym Mismatches)

1. **Add to custom_curies.yaml or METPO:**
   ```yaml
   gram_stain:
     gram_positive:
       curie: "METPO:1000698"
       name: "gram positive"
     gram_negative:
       curie: "METPO:1000699"
       name: "gram negative"
     gram_variable:
       curie: "METPO:1000700"
       name: "gram variable"
   ```

2. **Add to METPO metpo_sheet.tsv** (bacdive keyword synonym column):
   - METPO:1000702 (motile): add "motile"
   - METPO:1000871 (spore forming): add "spore-forming"

### Medium Priority (Enhance with Structured Paths)

3. **Extract from `Morphology.pigmentation.color`:**
   - kg-microbe already has color mappings in custom_curies.yaml
   - Need to verify if bacdive.py extracts from this path
   - If not, add extraction code similar to cell shape extraction

4. **Extract from `Physiology and metabolism.compound production.compound`:**
   - This gives specific compound names
   - Complements the generic production keywords
   - May want to create edges: organism → produces → specific_compound

### Low Priority

5. **Consider adding "diazotroph"** to custom_curies.yaml (only 2 strains)

6. **Don't add:**
   - colony-forming (too generic)
   - Bacteria, Archaea (taxonomy)
   - 16S/genome sequence (metadata)
   - other (uninformative)

---

## Confidence Level

**I am 95% confident** that I have identified all keywords with structured path alternatives.

The 5% uncertainty is around:
1. Whether there are obscure structured paths I haven't discovered
2. Whether `Physiology and metabolism.compound production.compound` fully covers the production keywords
3. Whether there are other pigmentation-related fields besides `.color`

I verified by:
- ✅ Checking all 88 unique keyword values
- ✅ Examining MongoDB data for structured paths
- ✅ Reviewing kg-microbe extraction code
- ✅ Correlating keywords with structured data counts

The main finding: **Temperature preference keywords (mesophilic, thermophilic, etc.) truly have NO structured alternative** - this was a critical discovery that validates the kg-microbe implementation.

Commit message:

Address documentation feedback: add temperature range citations and cross-reference corrections
- Added citations to Madigan et al. and Bergey's Manual for temperature classification ranges
- Added cross-reference note in CRITICAL_FINDING_culture_temp_ph.md pointing readers to the correction
- Updated bacdive_keywords_analysis.md with correction note and strikethrough on incorrect entries
- Updated keywords_without_structured_paths.md with correction note and strikethrough
- Maintains documentation consistency across all BacDive analysis documents

docs/keywords_without_structured_paths.md, after:

# BacDive Keywords WITHOUT Structured Path Equivalents

**Date:** 2025-10-22  
**Source:** Analysis of bacdive.strains_api MongoDB collection

> **Important Correction:** This document originally stated that temperature keywords (mesophilic, thermophilic, psychrophilic, hyperthermophilic) have no structured path equivalents. This is **incorrect**. A structured path `Culture and growth conditions.culture temp` exists with data for 49,507 strains (49.8%). See `CRITICAL_FINDING_culture_temp_ph.md` for details. The sections below have been updated to reflect this correction.

Based on my analysis, here are ALL keywords where "Specific Path Available?" is "No" or "N/A":

## Definitive List of Keywords Without Structured Paths

### 1. Metadata / Non-Phenotypic (Can Ignore)

| Keyword | Count | Notes |
|---------|-------|-------|
| Bacteria | 97,270 | Taxonomy - not phenotype |
| Archaea | 1,125 | Taxonomy - not phenotype |
| 16S sequence | 27,058 | Data availability - not phenotype |
| genome sequence | 17,617 | Data availability - not phenotype |
| other | 49 | Uninformative catch-all |

**Conclusion:** These 5 keywords should NOT be mapped - they're metadata, not phenotypes.

---

### 2. Keywords WITH Structured Paths (But Different Format)

| Keyword | Count | Structured Path | Status |
|---------|-------|----------------|--------|
| Gram-negative | 12,842 | `Morphology.cell morphology.gram stain` = "negative" | **FIXABLE** - need synonym mapping |
| Gram-positive | 6,690 | `Morphology.cell morphology.gram stain` = "positive" | **FIXABLE** - need synonym mapping |
| Gram-variable | 101 | `Morphology.cell morphology.gram stain` = "variable" | **FIXABLE** - need synonym mapping |
| motile | 5,457 | `Morphology.cell morphology.motility` = "yes" | **FIXABLE** - need synonym mapping |
| spore-forming | 3,359 | `Physiology and metabolism.spore formation` = "yes" | **FIXABLE** - need synonym mapping |

**Conclusion:** These 5 keywords HAVE structured paths but need synonym mappings to connect them.

**Total strains affected:** 4,425 (Gram) + 113 (motile) + 1,440 (spore) = **5,978 strains**

---

### 3. Keywords WITHOUT Structured Path (True N/A)

#### 3a. Production/Metabolism Keywords (7 keywords, 1,027 strains)

| Keyword | Count | Investigation Result |
|---------|-------|---------------------|
| antibiotic compound production | 508 | **PARTIAL PATH:** `Physiology.compound production.compound` has some antibiotics (Heptaenic antibiotic: 99, Antimycin: 70, streptomycin: 19, oxytetracycline: 17) but keyword is more general |
| alcohol production | 30 | **PARTIAL PATH:** `Physiology.compound production.compound` = "ethanol" (19 strains) but keyword may cover more |
| toxin production | 53 | **PARTIAL PATH:** `Physiology.compound production.compound` = "toxin" (33 strains) but keyword may cover more |
| amino acid production | 28 | **PARTIAL PATH:** `Physiology.compound production.compound` = "L glutamic acid" (21 strains) but keyword may cover more |
| lactate production | 34 | **NO PATH FOUND** |
| polysaccharide production | 26 | **NO PATH FOUND** |
| methane production | 5 | **NO PATH FOUND** |

**Conclusion:** These keywords are **partially covered** by `Physiology and metabolism.compound production.compound` but the keyword is more general. The structured path has specific compounds, but keywords are broader categories.

**Recommendation:**
- Keep keyword mappings (already in custom_curies.yaml ✓)
- **Consider also extracting** from `Physiology and metabolism.compound production.compound` to get specific compounds
- Keywords give you "produces antibiotics" - structured path gives you "produces streptomycin"
- Both have value!

---

#### 3b. Pathogen Keywords (3 keywords, 2,683 strains)

| Keyword | Count | Investigation Result |
|---------|-------|---------------------|
| human pathogen | 1,607 | **CORRELATION:** Most (1,338) have biosafety level 2, but biosafety level ≠ pathogen type |
| animal pathogen | 700 | **CORRELATION:** Mixed biosafety levels (234 level 1, 225 level 2, 68 level 2,1) |
| plant pathogen | 376 | **CORRELATION:** Mostly level 1 (276 strains) |

**Investigation Details:**
- All strains have `Safety information.risk assessment.biosafety level`
- Biosafety level indicates **risk to humans**, not **host specificity**
- A level 1 plant pathogen is safe for humans but pathogenic to plants
- **NO** structured field for "host organism pathogenicity"
- `Isolation.origin.host organism` exists but indicates **isolation source**, not pathogenicity

**Conclusion:** These keywords provide **host-specific pathogenicity** information that is NOT available in structured paths.

**Recommendation:** Keep keyword mappings (already in custom_curies.yaml ✓)

---

#### 3c. Pigmentation Keywords (1 keyword, 166 strains)

| Keyword | Count | Investigation Result |
|---------|-------|---------------------|
| pigmented | 166 | **PATH EXISTS BUT DIFFERENT:** `Morphology.pigmentation.color` has specific colors (yellow: 37, red: 18, brown: 16, etc.) but only 4,534 strains have this data |

**Analysis:**
- Keyword "pigmented" (166 strains) is a **generic flag**
- Structured path `Morphology.pigmentation.color` (4,534 strains) has **specific colors**
- **No overlap** - these are independent data sources
- Keyword: "yes, it's pigmented"
- Structured path: "it's yellow" (or red, brown, etc.)

**Recommendation:**
- Keep keyword mapping for "pigmented" (already in custom_curies.yaml ✓)
- **ADD extraction** from `Morphology.pigmentation.color` to get specific pigment colors
- kg-microbe already has pigment color mappings in custom_curies.yaml (lines 113-153)
- **ACTION NEEDED:** Check if bacdive.py extracts from `Morphology.pigmentation.color`

---

#### 3d. Antibiotic Resistance Keyword (1 keyword, 157 strains)

| Keyword | Count | Investigation Result |
|---------|-------|---------------------|
| antibiotic resistance | 157 | **PATH EXISTS:** `Physiology and metabolism.antibiotic resistance` (6,560 strains with structured data) AND `Physiology and metabolism.antibiogram` |

**Analysis:**
- Structured path has **much more data** (6,560 strains vs 157 keyword)
- kg-microbe code DOES extract from structured paths (lines 1724-1767)
- Keyword is probably **redundant** or used when specific data unavailable

**Recommendation:** Keep keyword mapping (already in custom_curies.yaml ✓) as fallback

---

#### 3e. Colony Morphology Keyword (1 keyword, 2,582 strains)

| Keyword | Count | Investigation Result |
|---------|-------|---------------------|
| colony-forming | 2,582 | **NO PATH** (colony morphology section exists but doesn't have this specific trait) |

**Analysis:**
- Very generic - almost all bacteria form colonies
- Low information content
- Section `Morphology.colony morphology` exists but doesn't have a "forms colonies" field

**Recommendation:** **Don't map** - too generic to be useful

---

#### 3f. Nitrogen Fixation (1 keyword, 2 strains)

| Keyword | Count | Investigation Result |
|---------|-------|---------------------|
| diazotroph | 2 | **NO PATH FOUND** for nitrogen fixation capability |

**Recommendation:** Add to custom_curies.yaml if desired (very low count)

---

## Summary Table: True N/A Keywords (No Structured Path Alternative)

| Category | Keywords | Total Strains | Keep Mapping? | Extract from Path? |
|----------|----------|---------------|---------------|-------------------|
| **Metadata** | Bacteria, Archaea, 16S sequence, genome sequence, other | 127,089 | **NO** | N/A |
| **Format mismatch** | Gram-*, motile, spore-forming | 28,446* | **YES** | Already done |
| **Production** | antibiotic/alcohol/toxin/amino acid/lactate/polysaccharide/methane production | 1,027 | **YES** | **ADD** compound production |
| **Pathogen** | human/animal/plant pathogen | 2,683 | **YES** | No alternative |
| **Pigmentation** | pigmented | 166 | **YES** | **ADD** pigmentation.color |
| **Resistance** | antibiotic resistance | 157 | **YES** | Already done |
| **Colony** | colony-forming | 2,582 | **NO** | N/A |
| **Diazotroph** | diazotroph | 2 | **OPTIONAL** | N/A |

*Note: Keyword occurrences, not unique strains (strains may have multiple keywords)

---

## Answers to Your Question

**"Are you confident that you have mapped all keyword values to the more specific paths that reveal the same information?"**

### YES for:
- ✅ Oxygen preference
- ✅ Spore formation (with synonym fix needed)
- ✅ Trophic type / nutrition
- ✅ Cell shape
- ✅ Gram stain (with synonym fix needed)
- ✅ Motility (with synonym fix needed)
- ✅ Halophily
- ✅ Antibiotic resistance/sensitivity (structured data preferred)

### NO - Keywords are the ONLY or BETTER source for:
- ~~❌ **Temperature preference** (mesophilic, thermophilic, psychrophilic, hyperthermophilic) - **NO structured path exists**~~ **CORRECTION: Structured path DOES exist** - see `CRITICAL_FINDING_culture_temp_ph.md`
- ❌ **Pathogen type** (human/animal/plant) - biosafety level is different information
- ❌ **Production categories** (antibiotic/toxin/metabolite production) - keyword is broader than specific compounds
- ❌ **Generic pigmentation** - structured path has specific colors but keyword is a general flag

### PARTIAL - Both sources have value:
- ⚠️ **Production compounds**: keywords = category, path = specific compounds
- ⚠️ **Pigmentation**: keyword = "pigmented" (generic), path = specific color

---

## Action Items

### High Priority (Fix Synonym Mismatches)

1. **Add to custom_curies.yaml or METPO:**
   ```yaml
   gram_stain:
     gram_positive:
       curie: "METPO:1000698"
       name: "gram positive"
     gram_negative:
       curie: "METPO:1000699"
       name: "gram negative"
     gram_variable:
       curie: "METPO:1000700"
       name: "gram variable"
   ```

2. **Add to METPO metpo_sheet.tsv** (bacdive keyword synonym column):
   - METPO:1000702 (motile): add "motile"
   - METPO:1000871 (spore forming): add "spore-forming"

### Medium Priority (Enhance with Structured Paths)

3. **Extract from `Morphology.pigmentation.color`:**
   - kg-microbe already has color mappings in custom_curies.yaml
   - Need to verify if bacdive.py extracts from this path
   - If not, add extraction code similar to cell shape extraction

4. **Extract from `Physiology and metabolism.compound production.compound`:**
   - This gives specific compound names
   - Complements the generic production keywords
   - May want to create edges: organism → produces → specific_compound

### Low Priority

5. **Consider adding "diazotroph"** to custom_curies.yaml (only 2 strains)

6. **Don't add:**
   - colony-forming (too generic)
   - Bacteria, Archaea (taxonomy)
   - 16S/genome sequence (metadata)
   - other (uninformative)

---

## Confidence Level

**I am 95% confident** that I have identified all keywords with structured path alternatives.

The 5% uncertainty is around:
1. Whether there are obscure structured paths I haven't discovered
2. Whether `Physiology and metabolism.compound production.compound` fully covers the production keywords
3. Whether there are other pigmentation-related fields besides `.color`

I verified by:
- ✅ Checking all 88 unique keyword values
- ✅ Examining MongoDB data for structured paths
- ✅ Reviewing kg-microbe extraction code
- ✅ Correlating keywords with structured data counts

~~The main finding: **Temperature preference keywords (mesophilic, thermophilic, etc.) truly have NO structured alternative** - this was a critical discovery that validates the kg-microbe implementation.~~

**CORRECTION:** Further analysis revealed that temperature data DOES exist in a structured path (`Culture and growth conditions.culture temp`) with data for 49,507 strains. See `CRITICAL_FINDING_culture_temp_ph.md` for complete details.
